====================================================================================================
XANES Analysis:  Linear Combination Analysis,  Principal Component Analysis, Pre-edge Peak Fitting
====================================================================================================


XANES is highly sensitive to oxidation state and coordination environment
of the absorbing atom, and spectral features such as the energy and
intensity of observed peaks can often be used to qualitatively identify
these chemical and physical configurations.  To be clear, while the
physical and chemical origin of spectal features can be identified and
understood, the details of these peaks can be complicated enough that
direct and complete quantitative analysis from first principles is
difficult.

As a result, "XANES Analysis" of a spectrum typically involves making
linear combinations of spectra from known compounds or fitting the spectral
features and correlating trends in their positions and intensities to known
changes in spectral features with the desired characteristic such as
oxidation state.  This approach XANES spectroscopy is similar to the
empirical approaches used in other spectroscopies and can be incredibly
accurate and sensitive even if it ultimately relies on comparisons to
spectra of known materials.  In all cases, XANES analysis uses *normalized*
XAFS spectra, as from either the :func:`pre_edge` or :func:`mback`
function.

Within the context of Larch, there are two basic approaches to analyzing
XANES spectra.  The first of these involves fitting of the so-called
pre-edge peaks that are (generally) due to hybridization of :math:`d`
electron bands of a transition metal with oxygen :math:`p` electrons.
These peaks are at energies just below the main (:math:`4p` for first row
transition metals) edge.  They are typically split into several distinct
multiplet energies corresponding to molecular orbitals of the hybridized
metal :math:`3d` (for firs-row transition metals) and (typically) oxygen
:math:`2p` orbitals.  These features are quite robustly correlated with
electronic and local atomic structure of the metal and its ligands, and
quite a rich literature makes use of such **pre-edge peak fitting** in a
variety of fields.  As the energy resolution of XANES measurement continues
to improve, thes pre-edge peaks become clearer and a richer resource for
spectral analysis.

The second general approach to XANES analysis is to treat experimental
XANES spectra as a linear mixture of the XANES spectra of idealized
components.  This works on the assumption that the XANES signature of a
collection of atoms is the linear sum of the XANES from individual
components, which is valid in all but the most extreme conditions. In this
sense **Linear Combination Analysis** is a useful approach to XANES
analysis, and generally quite easy to do.  If done carefully, it can also
quite robust, though its sensitiviy can be somewhat limited.

What is not always clear in Linear Combination Analysis is what the proper
"standard" components should be, or even how many can be determined from a
collection of data.  For this question, standard spectroscopic methods such
as **Principal Component Analysis** (or PCA) and other linear-algebra based
analysis tools (which are nowadays often included in "Machine Learning"
methods) can be useful.  Strictly speaking, PCA is very limited in what it
can really tell you about a set of spectra -- it helps you identify how
many unique components make up a collection of spectra, and can help answer
if another spectrum is also explained well by those principal components,
and so "fits in" with the starting collecion of data.  This is admittedly
limited knowledge, but can be very useful in enabling further analysis.

These three approaches are exposed in the Larix application
(:ref:`larix_app`), and the documentation here largely reflects the
operations done there.

But first a note for all XANES analysis.  All these methods rely on
comparing the spectral intensities normalized to the main absorption edge.
Thus, in order to get accurate quantitative results, the spectra analyzed
need to be well-normalized. More importantly, they need to be consistently
normalized.  In addition, sample preparation and measurement issues such as
pinhole effects, over-absorption and detector saturation or deadtime can
systematically alter the XANES spectra.  None of the analytic methods
described here for XANES analysis can independently identify when spectra
are not properly normalized or when artifacts that suppress the spectral
features have occured.  It is up to the experimentalist and analyst to make
these decisions.


Pre-edge Peak fitting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Pre-edge peaks can often be modeled as a simple sum of mathematical
functions such as :func:`gaussian`, :func:`lorentzian`, or :func:`voigt`.
Typically, no more than 4 functions are needed to model most pre-edge
peaks.  Still, it is not always so simple to identify several aspects of
pre-edge peak fitting.  These challenges include

 * identifying and removing the background due to the main absorption
   edge.
 * identifying the proper shape of the peaks.
 * making sure that the peaks overlap but do not exchange or become
   coincident.

The XAS Viewer application helps with each of the tasks, and it is highly
recommended that you start with this GUI.  See :ref:`larix_preedge`.



Linear Combination Analysis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Many XANES spectra are made on messy, heterogeneous systems or in
engineered samples in which a predictable if not completely understood
reaction is occuring.  In these cases and many related problems, using
linear combinations of spectra from known compounds to understand the
makeup of the unknown sample is an important analysis method.


..  function:: lincombo_fit(group, components, weights=None, minvals=None, maxvals=None, arrayname='norm', xmin=-np.inf, xmax=np.inf, sum_to_one=True)

    perform linear combination fitting for a group

    :param  group:       Group to be fitted
    :param  components:  List of groups to use as components (see Note 1)
    :param  weights:     array of starting  weights (see Note)
    :param  minvals:     array of min weights (or None to mean -inf)
    :param  maxvals:     array of max weights (or None to mean +inf)
    :param  arrayname:   string of array name to be fit  ['norm'] (see Note 2)
    :param  xmin:        x-value for start of fit range [-inf]
    :param  xmax:        x-value for end of fit range [+inf]
    :param  sum_to_one:  bool, whether to force weights to sum to 1.0 [True]

    :returns:  group with resulting weights and fit statistics

    Notes:

     1.  The names of Group members for the components must match those of the
         group to be fitted.
     2.  use ``None`` to use basic linear alg solution)
     3.  arrayname can be one of  `norm` or `dmude`


..  function:: lincombo_fitall(group, components, weights=None, minvals=None, maxvals=None, arrayname='norm', xmin=-np.inf, xmax=np.inf, sum_to_one=True)


    perform linear combination fittings for a group with all combinations
    of 2 or more of the components given

    :param  group: Group to be fitted
    :param  components: List of groups to use as components (see Note)
    :param  weights: array of starting  weights (see Note)
    :param  minvals: array of min weights (or None to mean -inf)
    :param  maxvals: array of max weights (or None to mean +inf)
    :param  arrayname: string of array name to be fit (see Note 2)
    :param  xmin: x-value for start of fit range [-inf]
    :param  xmax: x-value for end of fit range [+inf]
    :param  sum_to_one: bool, whether to force weights to sum to 1.0 [True]

    :return: list of groups with resulting weights and fit statistics,
     ordered by reduced chi-square (best first)

    See notes for :func:`lincombo_fit`.


Principal Component Analysis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To use Principal Component Analysis, you must first use a collection of
spectra to build or "train" the model.  With a trained model, you can ask
how many independent components are needed to describe the variation in the
collection.

..  function:: pca_train(groups, arrayname='norm', xmin=-np.inf, xmax=np.inf, sum_to_one=True)

    use a list of data groups to train a Principal Component Analysis model

    :param  groups:      list of groups to use as components
    :param  arrayname:   string of array name to be fit (see Note) ['norm']
    :param  xmin:        x-value for start of fit range [-inf]
    :param  xmax:        x-value for end of fit range [+inf]

    :return: group with trained PCA model, to be used with :func:`pca_fit`

     1.  The group members for the components must match each other
         in data content and array names.
     2.  arrayname can be one of  `norm` or `dmude`

The trained PCA group returned will have the following members:

          ============ ==================================================
           name             meaning
          ============ ==================================================
	  x              x or energy value from model
          arrayname      array name used to train model
          labels         list of labels (filenames for each input group)
	  ydat           2D array of input components, interpolated to `x`
	  xmin           minimum `x` value used.
	  xmax           maximum `x` value used.
	  pcamodel       raw return value from scikit-learn :meth:`PCA.fit`.
	  mean           mean value of `ydat`.
	  components     list of components, ordered by variance score
          variances      list of weights for each component.
          ============ ==================================================


.. function:: pca_fit(group, pca_model, ncomps=None, _larch=None)

    fit a spectrum from a group to a pca training model from pca_train()

    :param  group:       group with data to fit
    :param  pca_model:   PCA model as found from :func:`pca_train`
    :param  ncomps:      number of components to included

    :return: `None`.


    On success, the input group will have a subgroup name `pca_result`
    created with the following members:

          ============ ==================================================
           name             meaning
          ============ ==================================================
	  x              x or energy value from model
          ydat           input data interpolated onto `x`
          yfit           linear least-squares fit using model components
          weights        weights for PCA components
          chi_square     goodness-of-fit measure
          pca_model      the input PCA model
          ============ ==================================================


PCA example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


A simple example of using these PCA functions is given below, building on
the dataset from Lengke, et al shown in section :ref:`fit_example3_sec`.  Here,
we'll first read in six "standards" and one unknown spectra from an Athena
project file and extract the desired groups.  We then make sure that all
the spectra have pre-edge subtraction and normalization done consistently.
This may not be necessary if care was taken in the steps that generated the
project file, but we include it here for completeness.

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/pca/pca_aucyano.lar

Next, we're ready to train the PCA model with the collection of standard
spectra, so we make a list of groups `standards` and create a training
model that we store in `au_pcamodel`.

With this PCA model, we can investigate the components and their weights.
To be clear, the PCA process first calculates and removes the mean of all
the components and then focuses on the variations in the spectra.  This is
especially helpful for XANES spectra as the mean normalized :math:`mu(E)`
is almost always larger than the variations.  We can then plot the mean and
the principal components themselves (in :numref:`fig_xanes_pca1a`), and the
weight of each component (in :numref:`fig_xanes_pca1b`) to explain the
variations in the training set (note that this does not include the mean,
and is on a log scale).

.. subfigstart::

.. _fig_xanes_pca1a:

.. figure::  _images/PCA_model_components.png
    :target: _images/PCA_model_components.png
    :width: 100%
    :align: center

    Results for the PCA training set of  6 Au :math:`L_{III}` XANES spectra.
    Mean and 4 most important components.

.. _fig_xanes_pca1b:

.. figure::  _images/PCA_model_weights.png
    :target: _images/PCA_model_weights.png
    :width: 100%
    :align: center

    Results for the PCA training set of  6 Au :math:`L_{III}` XANES spectra.
    Fractional weights or variances for the 4 most important components of
    the Au XANES spectra -- not including the mean spectrum.

.. subfigend::
    :width: .45
    :label: fig-xanes-pca


We also print out the weights of the components which will give::

 Comp #  |  Weight   |  Cumulative Total
    1    |  0.91834  |  0.91834
    2    |  0.04938  |  0.96772
    3    |  0.02321  |  0.99093
    4    |  0.00850  |  0.99942
    5    |  0.00058  |  1.00000
    6    |  0.00000  |  1.00000

which shows the values for the weights plotted in :numref:`fig_xanes_pca1b`
for the principal components.  This shows that the first 2 components
explain 95% of the variation, and that using 4 components will explain
99.9% of the variation in the data.

Finally, we finish the example script by seeing if the unknown spectrum can
be explained by the 4 principal components from the training set.  This is
shown in :numref:`fig_xanes_pcafit` and gives good confidence that the data
should be able to be explained by 4 components.  This is consistent with
the findings using linear combination analysis in section :ref:`fit_example3_sec`,
but gives a slightly firmer foundation for using that number of components.

.. _fig_xanes_pcafit:

.. figure::  _images/PCA_model_fit.png
    :target: _images/PCA_model_fit.png
    :width: 50%
    :align: center

    Fit to unknown Au :math:`L_{III}` XANES spectrum to a linear combination
    of the mean and 4 principle components of the training set.  The fit
    looks good enough to conclude that this spectrum probably is explained
    by the variances seen in the main 4 components from the training set.
